xii

very small3 and I must confess, that Ι find the most
learned antiquarios the most modest in their opinions .
concerning it, and that it seems to me to be a pisce

of great rashness‚ to judge peremptorily upon amatter, v

whereof at this great distance of time there arc no
competent witnesses on either side. At least Ι cannot
but think ita sufficient apology for my publishing this
book, to consider only, that though it seems to suffer
under a general prejudice at present, yet it has not
long done so; but tbat upon its first appearing in the
world, it met with an universal approbation, and that
too, from those who had better opportunities· of
examining the truth of it, as there were then more
¹monuments extant, and the traditions more fresh and
uncorrupted concerning the ancient British affairs
than any critics of the present age can pretend to;
that it had no adversary before Williarn of Newburgh
about the end of the reign of Richard the First, whose
virulent invective against it, we are told, proceeded

⁴ from a revenge he thought he owed tbe Welsh for an

affront they had given him3 that his opposition was
far from shaking the credit of it with our succeeding
historiens, who have, most of thern, till the beginning
of the last century, confirmed it with their testimonias
and copied after it, as often as they had occasion to
treat of the same affairs: that its authority was alleged

· by King Edward the First and all the nobility of the

kingdom, in a controversy of the greatest importance,
before Boniface the Eighth3 that even in this learned
age, that is so industrious to detect any imposturas
which through the credulity of former times had passed
upon the world, the arguments against this history are
not thought so convincing, but that several men of

 

